# READ ME for Rasterising Building Damage Data

This section describes the files contained in the building damage input folder.
`\02_housing_damage\input\`

- `adm3_area.csv`
  - contains the area of the polygons for the municipalities in the Philippines
- `Adm3_Perc_inGrid_Weight_Matrix.csv`
  - shows the percentage of a municipality in a grid.
  - This is contained in the Municipality Completeness column.
  - The values for one municipality add up to 100%.
- `Grid_Matching_Adm3_Max.csv`
  - shows one version of municipality assignment to grid
  - using the municipality that covers the largest area in the grid.
- `Grid_Perc_inAdm3_Weight_Matrix.csv`
  - shows the percentage of a grid that is in a municipality.
  - This is contained in the Grid Completeness column.
- `IMpact_data_philipines_SEP_2021.csv`
  - contains the typhoon impact data by municipality.
- `phl_adm3_grid_intersections_area.csv`
  - contains the area of the intersections of the municipalities and the grid
- `phl_hotosm_bld_centroid_count.csv`
  - contains the number of building centroids per grid
  - a file combining output for the whole of the Philippines.
- `phl_north_hotosm_bld_centroid_count.csv`
  - contains the number of building centroids per grid
  - computed from the HOTOSM shapefile for north Philippines.
- `phl_south_hotosm_bld_centroid_count.csv`
  - contains the number of building centroids per grid
  - computed from the HOTOSM shapefile for south Philippines.
- `typhoons.csv`
  - contains typhoon names and years
- `phl_adminboundaries_candidate_adm3.zip`
  - contains municipalities shapefile
  - can be found on HDX
- `hotosm_phl_south_buildings_polygons_shp.zip`
- `hotosm_phl_north_buildings_polygons_shp.zip`
  - contain building data from HOTOSM
  - can be found on HDX
- `phl_bld_centroids.gpkg`
  - contains the centroids from the building data

This section describes the files contained in the building damage output folder.
`\02_housing_damage\output\`

- `building_damage_bygrid_using_area.csv`
  - contains the output of the rasterisation of the building damage data.
  - uses area overlap for weighting
- `building_damage_bygrid.csv`
  - contains the output of the rasterisation of the building damage data.
  - uses number of buildings for weighting
- `phl_0.1_degree_grid.gpkg`
  - is the geopackage for the grid overlay as polygons on the Philippines
- `phl_0.1_degree_grid_centroids.gpkg`
  - is the geopackage for the centroids of the grid overlay for the Philippines
- `phl_0.1_degree_grid_centroids_land_overlap.gpkg`
  - is the geopackage for the centroids of the grid overlay for the Philippines
  - only covers centroids of grids which overlap with land no matter how small.

The following section contains the processes in the `02.0_preprocessing` notebook.

1. Grid Creation + Centroids
2. Intersection
3. Area Computation
4. Building Count

`02.1_municip_grid_assignment.ipynb` is no longer necessary

- the weights are created by number of buildings in preprocessing.

In QGIS,

- Based on [this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rwJhiExBIY4YDFsfc5ONoew-z0CXnO6VO80bGDWwus4/edit),
  - a 0.1-degree grid appears suitable for the raster.
- The process of assigning a grid to municipalities is described
  - [this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QZdI_dciy3TBU6HEQtmYgB84g4Gg1sRP5tF7CLuw71U/edit)
- The Grid Completeness column shows how much of that grid was covered by the municipality.
- The process of assigning municipalities to grids was similarly done with the weighting.
- The process of getting the number of buildings per grid
  - from the HOTOSM data is described in [this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YezDLP5edAXg-Ad48EBwbIgIoLsIcDFvcbQ6-Ju91kk/edit).
